Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Peter Turchin. He is
Emeritus professor at the University of Connecticut. He's also
a project leader at the Complexity Science Hub Vienna.
And today, we're going to talk a little bit
about some of the main topics he's been working
on throughout his, uh, life. So, uh, uh, uh,
but he's, I also want to mention that his
latest book is The Great Holocene Transformation. So Doctor
Turchin, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you. Glad to be here.
So I, I would like to ask you first,
and I hope we have time to get a
little bit more into detail here, but uh what
causes political communities to cohere and what causes them
to fall apart because this is something that you've
worked on.
Well, that's a huge question, so you probably want
to break it up into, um, into smaller, uh,
questions. Uh, LET'S start by talking about the, um,
you know, uh, about what causes. Uh, POLITICAL communities
to cohere because that's the subject of my latest
book, as you mentioned, the Great Holocene, uh, Transformation.
I should warn, uh, your listeners that this is
an academic book. It's not a popular book. Uh,
IF you want to, uh, read a popular introduction
to these ideas, I have another book which I
published about, mm, uh, in 2015. Uh, CALLED, um,
ultra society. All right, so, um, so the ideas,
uh, are the, uh, general, mm, theory which underlies,
uh, the, um, and, uh, my understanding of the
evolution of large scale complex societies is explained in
outer society. And now it has been extensively tested
empirically with um a massive data set we have
collected since then using the what you call this
a shot uh the uh Global History Data Bank.
Right, so, um, so let's talk about, uh, quick,
quick introduction. Human species, um, is considered to be
about 200,000 years old, all right, and for 97%
of our history, actually often for 95% of our
history, evolutionary history, we've lived in small-scale societies numbering
in the, uh, some hundreds or maybe low thousands.
And then in the last 10,000 years during the
um uh geological epoch called the Holocene, all right,
suddenly the scale and complexity of human societies literally
exploded. Uh, YOU know, uh, there are some states,
um, on, um, you know, in, on Earth that,
uh, number more than Uh, 1 billion individuals and
many large states have hundreds of millions living in
them. So this is a huge, uh, change and,
um, one part of my research has been addressing
the question, how can we understand that, what were
the, uh, mechanisms and evolutionary forces that resulted in
this, uh, change. Mhm.
Uh, AND so, but, but I mean, uh, what
are perhaps the main mechanisms that you would say
play a role in, uh, political societies evolving, growing
larger, scaling up, and so on.
Yeah, well, um, there are many theories, uh, in
fact, there are hundreds of, uh, special theories, but
there are several general themes. Some people point to
the adoption of agriculture, and there is a general,
uh, consensus which I, which includes myself, that, that,
uh, adoption of agriculture was a necessary condition. But
not sufficient because there are many regions on Earth
such as New Guinea for example that had agriculture
for many thousands of years but did not, um,
develop states until they were, uh, you know, colonized
by Europeans, all right. So then other theories, um,
uh, uh, there are some other theories which are
functional theories, they basically point to some function that
states, uh, fulfill and, uh, uh, try to understand
the evolution of states by uh appealing to this,
uh, function. And then there are many theories which
include various kinds of coercion. Some theories talk about
internal um uh violence, so the famous Marxian, Marxian
Engels uh theories. Other theories talk about, um, external
coercion and the warfare. So the theory that I
have been, uh, that I've been working on, which
I think is the best, both, uh, it is
both, uh, theoretically the best justified, all right, and
it is also empirically supported. This theory arises in
the new discipline of cultural evolution and it's called
cultural multi-level selection. The main idea there that it
was a competition between societies or rather, uh, to
be more precise polities. A polity is a politically
independent organization that includes, um, you know, uh, the
states and Inspires, modern nation states, uh, chiefdoms of
various kinds, and also small-scale societies such as agricultural
Neolithic villages or even hunt, uh, hunter-gatherer, uh, camps,
um, and, uh, small-scale societies of this kind. So,
um, a similar cultural multi-level selection theory focuses on
competition between polities. And assigns that as the driving
force, uh, in evolution of complex societies. Essentially, the
idea is, um, fairly simple, uh, and it is
present already in Charles Darwin. Uh, SO the idea
is that, um, uh, competition between societies, especially during
the, uh, Holocene which when it, uh, took the
form of warfare. Uh, DROVE, um, evolution of large
scale simply because a larger scale polities have a
better advantage of small-scale polities both in defense and
perhaps collective predation. All right, but also in order
to keep the, uh, large, uh, in order, in,
in, in order to grow to large scale uh
without falling apart. You need many uh new institutions.
So it was this competition between politics that selected
for larger and larger, both scale and institutional uh
complexity.
Do we have a good understanding of the factors
that contribute to the collapse of complex societies? BECAUSE
I mean we tend to hear many different theories,
some of them do not seem to have lots
of scientific support, others seem to have a little
bit more, but what do we know about what
causes the collapse of complex societies?
Well, um, there are many, again, there are many
theories, and let me just, uh, uh, uh, just
step back for a moment. So the theory of
cultural multilevel selection. Uh, HOW do we know that
it is supported? First of all, you want to
know that it is internally consistent and the only
way to do that is to translate theory into
mathematical models, all right, so we have both, uh,
analytical and uh analytically solved mathematical models and of
course more realistic computational models called agent-based uh Uh,
simulations. Um, SO these models, uh, uh, actually tell
us that if we, um, that our, this, uh,
our, mm, the set of assumptions we make about
how, uh, large-scale complex societies evolved actually is consistent
because when you translate them into mathematical models, uh,
they, uh, these models. Greater dynamics that you propose
to happen and of course then um the models
are also very important because we can extract quantitative
predictions from them and then test those predictions with
data. So in my book, um, The Great Coloscene
Transformation, I go through this uh both, um, uh,
both, uh, modeling. Uh, MATERIAL and empirical material. All
right, so now back to your question, uh, again,
there are many theories about why, um, complex societies,
um, may collapse. Um, WHAT we know is that
it's not even inevitable. OK, first of all, let's
again step back to one, very, um, you know,
theory which, um, which many people talk about is
Joseph Tainter, uh, which the theory that says that
Uh, complex societies collapse because they, uh, they become
too complex. They have acquired too many complex, too
much complexity. This is called sometimes complexity overhang and
so those societies collapse because they have too much
complexity. But the theory that um I and my
colleagues advocate actually says that most complexity that evolved
such as uh institutional complexity, um, and, um, you
know, technological complexity and many other things, that's actually
useful. Uh, COMPLEXITY and in fact they make societies
more stable or, uh, more resilient actually so uh
they can adapt to new conditions without um falling
apart, all right so the theory that I and
my colleagues favor is called structural demographic theory and
that theory is actually explained in another. A book,
um, end, end Times, which was published about 2
or 3 years ago and so people can actually
find out the details there, all right, but very
briefly, um, what we see is that, um, so,
uh, complex societies organized states appeared about 5000 years
ago, really in the last, uh, 2 or 3%.
Of our evolutionary history, so they're very noble and
the first ones were quite fragile and they kept,
uh, uh, they had a high probability of collapsing,
but as they accumulated more institutions, they became more
resilient to, uh, to forces of collapse and so
we see this, um, that as they approach them.
Uh, THE, the approach today, you see first of
all that even though societies periodically get stressed, they
are much less likely to have a complete collapse,
so they just have a series of civil wars
or revolutions which they live through and then reconstituted
uh themselves, all right, and the periods of this,
mm, uh, of this, uh, instability, they become, they
have become shorter. All right. But the general rule
still remains that uh all complex societies including our
own experience these periodic waves of internal instability roughly
at about 20 or 300 century intervals.
Uh, AND how did you arrive at that, uh,
2-300 year interval? I mean, and do you have
an explanation as to why that sort of interval,
uh, occurs, why we have that, those sorts of
cycles, let's say.
Yeah, so these are not, um, uh, uh, perfectly
periodic mathematical cycles. Rather, it's, uh, yeah, there is,
it's more like maybe the better dynamic, a better,
mm, uh, word would be boom bust dynamics. How
do, first of all, how do you know that
this happens? Well, um, uh, in our, um, um.
You know, uh, uh, brand of science which we
call Cleo dynamics from Cleo, the Muse of history
and dynamics, the science of change. All right, we,
um, treat history just as any other natural or
social, uh Sciences, which means that um uh we
want to quantify various processes that um we um
observe in um uh history and specifically um talking
about instability. Uh, uh, MY, uh, research group has
spent a lot of, mm, devoted a lot of
energy and time and resources to quantifying instability. So
how do we do it? Well, first of all,
um, we, uh, look to recorded histories and we,
um, simply record all kinds of political violence events
that may range from microviol events such as a
In urban riot or um, you know, uh, or
a rural insurrection that may result in killing a
few people. So we only look at, uh, at
events which are lethal because that's, mm, first of
all, that's clear that this is violence, right? And
secondly, they're much more likely to be recorded, right,
and then, um, uh, this, uh, the scale of
these events, uh, goes all the way to full-blown
civil wars or transformative revolutions that make you, you
know, sometimes millions or even in some cases tens
of millions of people. So what we do is
one approach is we, we, we collect Mm, data
on such events and then you look at the
statistical distribution of such events and what you find,
uh, when you do it, you find that, um,
uh, complex societies organized states may function reasonably well
for a century or so with, uh, while, while
keeping internal peace. Uh, SO we would see very
low, um, incidence of political violence events and they
would be small in scale, all right, but then
inevitably, uh, periods of, uh, you know, end times
arrive and then we often see centuries, sometimes even
longer periods of disintegration, disintegrative, uh, phases during which
you have social turbulence, political violence, oftentimes, sometimes leading
to collapse, meaning that Um, you know, a substantial
proportion of population either disappears, either, uh, Diazovsky is
killed and, you know, or they run away. All
right, we see a, uh, collapse of, uh, states,
um, uh, who that lose, uh, central authority and
fragment into smaller scale polities and things like that.
So collapse is not inevitable, but it is actually
fairly frequent during those, uh, disintegrative phases. And then
somehow, uh, and then sometimes society has just collapsed
and are never seen again. So for example, in,
um, in what's now Pakistan, Indus Valley, the Indus
Valley Civilization was quite, um, amazing civilization for several
100 years. And then it, uh, collapsed to the
point where it disappeared. We don't even know what
language they spoke, all right, and there was a
period of when, uh, there were no Uh, you
know, no large scale settlement cities, no cities, um,
no, no evidence of, mm, of, um, you know,
large scale societies. Yes, so, uh, so some societies
experienced such collapses. Others are famous examples of collapses
such as the Maya, uh, states. In fact, they,
after some period, uh, other Mayan, uh, polities. Um,
AROSE maybe not in exactly the same position but
in the same general area and there is, as
a result of that, Maya, the Maya, Mayan people
are still, uh, you know, they still live in
Yucatan, uh, in Mexico. And you know, uh, they
speak, still speak, uh, their language which is descendant
of what they spoke and so on and so
forth. And then other societies don't collapse, so you
see these waves of instability as I mentioned, 2
at 2 or 300 years, 23 centuries, um, so
for example, So right now we live in such
a wave of uh, of instability, that's very clear.
The previous one is, uh, is called the Age
of Revolutions, roughly speaking from 1789 to maybe beginning
of, uh, 20th century, so 19th century. Before that
we had the general crisis of the 17th century.
Before that, the late medieval crisis and so on
back um into the past, we see every 2
or 3 years, uh sorry, every 2 or 3
centuries recurring waves of uh instability and as I
said, As we get closer to the day, these
waves of instability, um, uh, um, result in fewer,
in lesser probability of utter collapse. So societies managed
to somehow solve those, uh, those problems and, uh,
reconstitute themselves.
So, uh, later in our conversation, I hope we
get the time to get more into the current
instability we're going through right now, but I would
like to ask you now particularly about one concept
that you've been working on a lot, that is
the one of elite overproduction. So, uh, could you
tell us about that, what elite overproduction is and
what leads to it?
Yes, in fact, uh, talking about, um, these waves
of instability, they have a complex of forces, but,
uh, one of the most important ones and certainly
the one which is, um, uh, uh, most, um,
uh, uh, common, commonly present during these periods is
what we call it overproduction. So this is uh
this is a short uh term what we mean
actually is that, um, first, uh, oh, first let
me just give you some definitions. First of all,
who are the elites? This is, uh, simply a
neutral sociological definition. Uh, A small proportion of the
population, 1 to sometimes, uh, more% who concentrate social
power in their hands, and social power includes such
varieties as military power, administrative power, economic power, and
ideological or persuasion. Um, SO, um, uh, what's important
about elites is how this, they are reproduced, obviously,
um, uh, you know, uh, people, uh, age and
retire or die and so they need to be
replaced. So people who would like to replace, who
would like to become parts of at least, you
call them, you know, elite aspirants, you know, these
are elite wannabes. And there are always more uh
elite aspirants than mm their positions for them and
some of this, uh, some of the, this, this
results in competition which um when it's reasonable, you,
uh, it's, it's quite, uh, it's a good thing
because, you know, you want better, um, candidates to,
uh, to succeed rather than just, um, uh, allow
everybody to become a power holder. But the problem
is that sometimes the number of elite aspirants begins
to overwhelm the number of positions, you know, so
it's, uh, not just, uh, you know, like let's
say 50% more or twice as many, but 3
times, 5 times, even 10 times, and so once
we see such uh such, um, Uh, intense competition,
that's actually counterproductive because so many, um, elite aspirants,
uh, are frustrated in their goals, and many of
them are quite, you know, quite good, all right,
and so, um, they consider the situation to be
blatantly unfair. And so, um, some of them, uh,
turn into counter-elites, and counter-elites, they are, uh, there
are still people who viewed power oftentimes, but they
are, uh, they use, um, uh, they, uh, work
against the established elites. So think about famous revolutionaries
like Fidel Castro and Los Barrabudos, for example, or
Vladimir, uh, Lenin and the Bolsheviks and so on
and so forth. All right, these are counter-elites, uh,
they build power to overthrow the established elites, so
the, for example, the Romanev dynasty in the case
of, um, of the Bolsheviks, well, um, and install
themselves as the new, uh, established elites, right? So,
um, so, um, uh, so, uh, the long term
would be over. Production of elite aspirants, but, you
know, uh, we just shortened it to elite overproduction
and that is in fact, um, the essentially ubiquitous,
uh, condition leading to, um, major, mm crisis resulting,
um, typically resulting in revolution, civil wars, or some
periods of really high social turbulence and political, uh,
violence.
So, uh, and would you say that we are
witnessing right now elite overproduction, uh, in several countries,
particularly, uh, I'm going to focus on the West
here due to the expansion of higher education and
the fact that since around the last great, uh.
Financial crisis of 2008 to 2009, many of those
people who have attended higher education can no longer
get access to the well paid jobs that they
would like to.
Yeah, well, it's, um, uh, things are a bit
more complicated, uh, than that. So let's use, um,
the example of the United States, uh, that's the
country that, um, I know from inside because I've
lived there for, uh, my, uh, for all of
my adult, uh, life and also United States has
actually entered this, um. Uh, PERIOD of, uh, stability
earlier than, uh, Western European countries or East Asian
countries such as Japan and South Korea, right, which
is similar. So, mm, so this is, this is
why it's a good example, uh, to, mm, to
use. In fact, I, back, um, uh, 16 years
ago, I, I almost 16 years ago I published,
uh, a forecast, um. Uh, THAT, uh, suggested that
the United States was on the road to a
crisis that would, um, peak during the 2020. So,
Let me unpack, let me tell you what was
the basis of my, uh, prediction and, um, how
it works. So, um, so, um, illiteral production, uh,
has been developing in the United States and it
was very obvious by 2010 when I made this,
uh, prediction. So what is the cause of it?
All right. Um, WHAT happened was that, uh, United
States, um, uh, was until about 1970s. The United
States was in many ways a very highly socially
democratic country. In fact, it may, it could be
thought of almost as a Nordic country similar to
Denmark, you know, Sweden and so on and so
forth, um, and as a result of that, uh,
the, um, uh, the uh uh the economic inequality
has been declining, uh, from the beginning of the
20th century until 1980. Or so, but, um, during
the 1970s, um, several mm, uh, changes were adopted
by the governing, uh, elites at the time which
resulted in reversing this, uh, trend. So specifically, many
people think about the Reagan, uh, revolution, but in
fact it started even earlier under Carter. Uh, ESSENTIALLY,
uh, this resulted in, uh, taking away the, uh,
much of the power that workers had to, um,
to organize and to, um, to, uh, push for,
uh, their salaries and many, um, you know, um,
other factors which resulted, uh, you know, which I
described, uh, at length in my book in time,
so let me, let me just summarize things. So
what happened was that prior to 1970s, Um, then,
um, uh, compensation of American workers was increasing together
with their productivity, right, and then, uh, in, in,
uh, in, in the late 1970s what happened that
productivity continued to increase, but the compensation wages and
so on, uh, stagnated and even declined. So that
difference between those things had to go somewhere, and
it, where it didn't go, it went to the
elites. Uh, PRIMARILY economic elites but also political, uh,
and other types of elites. All right, so, uh,
I call this process the wealth pump. It was
essentially this mechanism that was taking wealth from the,
uh, majority of population, the non-elite population, and gave
it to the elites. So this had, um, three,
consequences. First of all, it resulted in um stagnation
and even decline of well-being of the majority of
population. So, uh, in our, in our jargon, we
call it um popular immiseration and this was a
true immiseration because eventually it resulted in biological mm
Measures of well-being such as life expectancy or average
population height, stature declining, uh, as a result of,
um, American, um, workers losing ground, right. So, um,
in, uh, this immiseration also results in, uh, increased,
uh, mass mobilization potential because people are upset about,
um, you know, they They know that, uh, prior
to that, every uh generation, um, every generation lived
better than the previous one, but that changed and
so over the last couple of generations actually live
worse than their parents and that, that, that causes
a lot of discontent. All right. So the second
thing was that this um wealth had to go
somewhere and it resulted in a massive increase of
uh power of uh wealth holders. So for example,
people who, or households that have 10 million. Uh,
DOLLARS of wealth or more, this is in inflation-adjusted
dollars, right? Deca billionaires, their numbers over the past
40 years increased tenfold, you know, the population has
grown by 40%, but we have 10 times as
many of, uh, such uber wealthy, and as you
go up, you get, um, uh, this gets more
and more blown out. So for example, at the
level of billionaires again. If we adjust, um, by,
uh, for inflation, our cutoff, we have 20 times
as many billionaires now compared to 40 years ago.
So, uh, wealth holders are, um, um, this is
an example of a bit of reproduction because in
our societies such as, uh, you know, United States,
Western Europe, and so on, we are governed by
a. COALITION of uh economic elites and um administrative
elites, right, and of course mm the balance of
power uh changes depending on what country we're talking
about. So for example, United States wealth holders really
Dominate whereas in countries like France, it's uh the
um it's the um administrative elites and how do
you get on, oh, I'll get to that, they
who have the, who have more power but that's
been changing to this dynamic anyway, so having too
many wealthy people is a problem because they, many
of them want to become, um, play a role
in the politics. And so you have the, this
um huge overproduction, 10-fold uh overproduction compared to, um,
you know, 40 or 50 years ago. OK, so
this is the second, uh, consequence. Uh, WE, we
talked about, mm, popular immiseration and overproduction of wealth
holders. The third consequence is, is that as the
general population immiserates, uh, then what this is now
known as precarity, though people become part of precariat,
which means that they live on the edge or
even Below the age. So that creates a, uh,
an incredible uh push factor for people to escape
that. And how do you do that? Well, in
our societies you go to college, all right, and
then as the college degree becomes devalued but too
many people getting it, you, you get an advanced
degree such as law degree or uh PhD and
things like that. And so this, uh, of course
results in overproduction of credentialed individuals. So elite over
production has two aspects, too many wealth holders and
too many credential holders, right? And they both have
the same, uh, problems because we have too many,
um, elites, and this is the really explosive combination.
It's, um, having too many, um, uh, overproduced, uh.
ELITE aspirants who are, uh, well organized, right, and,
um, and, um, mass, uh, mass, um, mobilization potential
which, uh, provides the raw force, all right, and
gets organized and channeled by counter elites. That's, uh,
that's the worst combination resulting in, um, oftentimes, uh,
state collapse or, uh, civil wars and, um, mm,
and or revolutions.
OK, so let me ask you then, uh, in
the early 2010s, as you said, you predicted, uh,
based on what you've just mentioned, uh, that there
would be worldwide social unrest in the 2020s. Looking
at the world right now as it is right
now, do you think that your hypothesis has been
validated and in your terms or not?
Um, I actually didn't say about anything worldwide. I
was focusing, uh, on, uh, North America, uh, and,
and, and Western Europe. And also, uh, Western Europe
was at the time, um, behind the United States.
You can see this quite clearly that by looking
at when the inequality is not a driving force
in our theory, inequality, but inequality is a good
indicator, right? So that between the over overproduction and,
uh, immiseration. Is, uh, uh, yeah, is recorded by
having, uh, by observing larger uh economic inequality, so
we can see that inequality started growing first in
the United States, um, and then at, uh, 1020
year lag time, uh, we see the same processes
taking over, um, in Western Europe or, you know,
or Japan, and so they are behind the United
States, right, and other countries. It's like China for
example or Russia, they are actually, they actually have
their own, um, uh, dynamics and they are, they
are not part of this, uh, this prediction, right?
And so, yeah, but yes, um, obviously, um, my,
uh, the whole point of publishing this prediction was
not to predict the future, which is, uh, essentially
possible, but this is called scientific prediction. How do
you know that some theory is better than, uh,
another one. We extract predictions from them and, and
these predictions don't have to be about the future.
They could be about, uh, past, for example, so
you could test theories in. Uh, PAST societies, right?
But, so the, the, but the point is to
see, uh, which theories actually work, uh, better. At
the time when I published my prediction in 2010,
there were rival theories. So for example, uh, Steven
Pinker, um, published, uh, several books and he confident,
confidently predicted that violence would be declining. And violence,
political violence was indeed declining in the years before
2010, but, uh, structural demographic theory, theory that, um,
uh, that we work upon was tracing the deep
forces in societies, all right, and those forces have
been actually these pressures, uh, were developing for the
previous, you know, sort. 30 years or so and
that's why um we uh were predicting this trend
reversal that the trend to becoming more peaceful is
actually would be reversed and um lo and behold
you after 2010, this is precisely what happened.
And do you still believe, uh, because we are
now in late 2025, do you believe that, uh,
civil war could happen in the US in the
2020s?
In fact, um, I argue, um, and I have
argued on my sub-stack that we are in, um,
a, uh, true revolution ever since, uh, Donald Trump
became president in January of this year. I, um,
I would say that we are in a true
revolution, um, as, um, Um, as, uh, indicated by
two, developments. First of all, mm, it's a revolution
of the elites. So the mega movement led by,
uh, Trump is a typical, uh, counter-elite movement and
so there was a concerted and unlike this first,
mm, uh, term back in 2016, 2020. Now there
was uh a true attempt to replace the, uh,
the ruling class, the previous ruling class, and, um,
replace them with the, uh, with MAGA personnel, all
right, so that's, that's one criterion. The second one
is that it, it's a it's an attempt at
transformative revolution. So it attempts to transform the American
society in a variety of ways. So, for example,
the abolition of DEI, um, wokeness and so on,
that was, that's one aspect of it, uh, but
another one, a very obvious one is that An
attempt to change the role that the United States
plays on the international arena. Essentially Trump is dismantling
the American empire, right? So that's a huge, um,
transformation. So far, uh, thankfully this has been relatively,
uh, non-violent, um, revolution, so elites that, you know,
uh, the former elites that don't get. Their heads
cut off with guillotines, right? But rather fired, all
right, but, uh, uh, and that's actually, uh, good,
but there, there is, uh, uh, definitely a high
potential of uh violence uh spiraling out of, uh,
control, so that, that, um, possibility, uh, is non-zero,
that's, uh, that's for sure.
Um, LOOKING at, uh, a potential examples of, uh,
nonviolent ends to elite overproduction, uh, I mean, first
of all, could, could you give us an histor
a historical example of that, and do you think
that, uh, there's still space and opportunity for us
to do the same in the current context?
So the question is, um, um, how inevitable is,
uh, serious, uh, violence, right? Is that, if I
understand,
yeah, yeah, yes, basically, yes.
Yeah, so that's, um, um, uh, go, uh, go
back to the previous wave, of, uh, such, uh,
political, uh, disintegration which is, as I mentioned, the
age of revolutions, especially if you look at, uh,
1748 and, uh, the, the succeeding years. This was,
um, uh, this middle of the 19th century. There
were revolutions and civil wars, uh, worldwide. The famous
revolutions of 1748 that affected most of Europe, but
also if you think about it just shortly following
them, there was a civil war in the United
States 1861. And there was a huge um uh
uh uh uh civil war in China known as
the mm uh Taiping Rebellion which resulted in the
most, uh, you know, destructive civil war. Uh, EVER,
um, the number of people killed was somewhere between
20 and 50 million people. So, so, uh, so
this was a, uh, a really worldwide, uh, wave
of revolutions. However, some societies escaped it. So for
example, um, the British Empire was under huge, mm,
uh, pressure, and there was at the micro, uh,
uh, at the micro, mm. Uh, LEVEL. There were
lots of, um, uh, of, um, instability events such
as riots and, uh, You know, some massacres and
things like that, but it never, uh, escalated into
a full-blown civil war or revolution, so the British
Empire managed to solve that problem. And another example
is Russian Empire, Russian Empire also was under huge,
uh, pressure, but, um, both, um, British Empire, Russian
Empire managed to adopt a series of reforms. All
right, very deep reforms in um UK that resulted
in um uh democratizing, giving, um, um, common people,
um, voting rights and also abolishing some of the
laws which uh resulted in huge. LIKE the Koran
laws in Russia, it was the period called the
great reforms really uh changed the nature of society.
Now, of course, this was temporary in, in Russia.
Russia managed to solve problems for, for about 50
years and then it still uh went into the
revolutions in the early 20th century. And the British
Empire also eventually collapsed, uh, by 1960s, uh, well,
starting with India, um, becoming independent and so on
and so forth. So any of, any of such
solutions are always temporary because then, you know, you
have to deal with, um, rising unrest again. However,
still, Um, that we see that, uh, it is
possible to avoid, um, really bloody revolution, and I,
and, um, I hope that we, uh, humanity is
collectively learning. Uh, WHAT do I mean by that?
Well, we are accumulating institutions. Um, AND the technologies
that, uh, decrease the probability of violent rupture. So,
uh, the spread of democratic, um, uh, norms, for
example, in the last, um, you know, a couple
100 years or, and also increasing, uh, tech technologies
which actually make us more, uh, Uh, you know,
wealthy, more affluent, right? Uh, SO, uh, so all
of that, uh, uh, is working to help us,
mm, avoid the wars. So, so my hope is
that, uh, eventually humanity will work. Some of this,
um, um, wages of instability, um, actually are not
necessarily bad. Because, uh, the societies need to renew
themselves. They, we get, uh, too set in our
ways of needs become too selfish and so they,
some kind of revolution of elites is necessary, but
my hope is that we will be able to
do it in, uh, uh, non-violent ways. In fact,
uh, the initial promise of, uh, democracy was that
it would allow elite. Um, A replacement in peaceful
ways. Unfortunately, so far it has not, uh, really
worked that well, all right. So we just need
to evolve more to be able to, uh, to
do, uh, to solve our, uh, problems in non-violent
ways.
Uh, DO you think we still have time for
just one more question, please?
Yeah, one last question. Mhm. Oh,
OK, so one last question then. Uh, DO you
think that, uh, looking back at what was done
in the US, in the UK, and elsewhere in
the 1950s, 1960s, and up until around the mid-1970s
where there was lots of economic reduction. Distribution and
uh there was higher upward social mobility. Do you
think that uh there's space for us to go
back to some of those solutions to uh improve
uh or to decrease social unrest and solve some
of the problems we are dealing with today?
Essentially, um, uh, uh, what happens because this process
is cycling, uh, we see this happens after the
age of revolutions, um, and resulting in a really
unprecedented, uh, prosperity in the United States and, and
much of the world. In fact, um, And we
see that happening after the 17th century crisis, after
the, uh, great, the late medieval crisis, there was,
uh, they were followed by a great expansion of,
uh, human, uh, well-being. We can document it and
so, so yes, um, this is what, uh, uh,
this, in fact this is a condition in, um,
the expansion, uh, increasing well-being results when, um, the
wealth pump gets shut down. Or even reversed, so,
so that the elites actually uh lose ground, become
fewer of them. For example, in the United States
um between the new GO and 1980, the numbers
of millionaires declined and their wealth has also declined
and that resulted in much better, a much more
balanced, uh, society. So this is what we will
have to do, uh, in order to mitigate, uh,
ourselves through the, uh, crisis that we are experiencing
right now, all right. So, um, so yes, um,
uh, we, humanity has done this before and so,
um, we will do it again. We just have
to be careful not to self-immolate in the nuclear
Armageddon. But, um, but in principle, um, it is
solvable. The only thing is that the combination of,
um, reforms and, uh, policies is, is likely to
be different from that, for example, which was used
in the United States during the Progressive era and
the New Deal because our societies have changed. All
right, and that means that we will have to
use a diff and also our challenges are diff
uh different because for example we have now artificial
intelligence um or um replacing, uh, jobs, um, it,
it's a challenge that which you have to deal
with. This is a novel, uh, challenge and it
will require, uh, its own, um, you know, uh,
policy changes to address. Mhm.
OK, great. So Doctor Turchin, I will be leaving
links to your latest book and also to End
Times and your other books in the description of
the interview. Uh, WOULD you like just to tell
us where people can find you and the rest
of your work on the internet?
Sure. Well, first of all, I have a website.
It's simply Peter Turchin uh without any spaces.com. All
right, um, and then I started, uh, earlier this
year, I started a substack. It's also called Peter
Turchin.substack. uh WHATEVER com I think. Uh, AND so
you can, um, you can, uh, see links to
all my, uh, works, uh, which I update regularly
on my website, and if you're interested, you can,
uh, follow, uh, my thinking. I, I publish, um,
at least once a week. Uh, USUALLY on the
weekend I publish a substantial pieces and then often
in midweek, like today, for example, I, I had,
uh, a smaller, um, you know, uh, post about
some developments so you can follow, uh, those if
you wish. Mhm.
Yes, I will also be leaving links to that
in the description of the interview and thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show. It's been an immense pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro,
Al Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan, Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.